>> Brown: NORTH KOREA CONDUCTED
ITS THIRD HIGH-LEVEL NUCLEAR
TEST, AN ACTION CONDEMNED BY THE
UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL,
PRESIDENT OBAMA, AND OTHER WORLD
LEADERS.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT, IS
PYONGYANG TAKING STEPS TO BUILD
A BOMB THAT COULD REACH THE
UNITED STATES?
WE EXAMINE THE CHALLENGES THE
TEST POSES FOR THE WEST.
>> Brown: HARI SREENIVASON GETS
THE LATEST ON THE FORMER LOS
ANGELES POLICE OFFICER WANTED
FOR MURDER, AFTER A GUN BATTLE
IN THE BIG AR MBEOUNTAINS THIS
AFTERNOON.
>> Woodruff: THEN, WE GET A
PREVIEW OF TONIGHT'S STATE OF
THE UNION ADDRESS FROM WHITE
HOUSE PRESS SECRETARY JAY
CARNEY.
>> Brown: FROM MALAYSIA, SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT STEVE SAPIENZA
REPORTS ON THE SOCIAL AND
ENVIRONMENTAL COSTS OF
HARVESTING PALM OIL, FOUND IN
PRODUCTS RANGING FROM COOKIES TO
COSMETICS.
>> ONE BIG REASON THE OIL IS SO
CHEAP TO PRODUCE IS THE STEADY
SUPPLY OF MIGRANT LABOR.
IT RELIES ON 500,000 GLOBAL
WORKERS TO FEED DEMAND FOR THE
PRODUCT AND FUEL MALAYSIA'S
ECONOMIC PROSPERITY.
>> Woodruff: RAY SUAREZ TALKS
WITH JOURNALIST PHIL BRONSTEIN
ABOUT HIS PROFILE OF THE NAVY
SEAL CREDITED WITH SHOOTING
OSAMA BIN LADEN.
>> HE TALKS ABOUT GOING IN THE
ROOM, ROLLING IN THE ROOM AS HE
PUTS IT AND BEING KIND OF
SHOCKED AT HOW TALL BIN LADEN
WAS AND HAVING TO RAISE HIS GUN
UP TO SHOOT HIM.
>> Brown: WE GET CLOSING
THOUGHTS ABOUT THE PRESIDENT'S
SPEECH TONIGHT FROM MARK SHIELDS
AND DAVID BROOKS.
THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON TONIGHT'S
>> Brown: AND WE GET SOME
TONIGHT'S NEWSHOUR.
>> Brown: ANOTHER DEFIANT ACT BY
NORTH KOREA TODAY.
THE NATION CARRIED OUT ITS THIRD
NUCLEAR TEST, TRIGGERING NEW
FEARS AND A GLOBAL OUTCRY.
THE ANNOUNCEMENT BLARED FORTH ON
NORTH KOREAN STATE TELEVISION.
>> MAIN PURPOSE OF THIS NUCLEAR
TEST IS TO SHOW THE RESENTMENT
OF OUR PEOPLE AND ARMY OF THE
UNITED STATES' HOSTILE ACTIONS
THAT ARE NO BETTER THAN ROBBERY.
OUR NUCLEAR TEST IS A FAIR
SELF-DEFENSIVE ACTION WHICH DOES
NOT CONTRAVENE ANY INTERNATIONAL
LAW.
>> Brown: THE UNDERGROUND BLAST
TOOK PLACE AT A REMOTE LOCATION
IN THE NORTH EASTERN PART OF THE
COUNTRY.
IT WAS THE COMMUNIST REGIME'S
THIRD NUCLEAR TEST SINCE 200
20062006.
SEISMIC READINGS IN SOUTH KOREA
SUGGESTED THIS DEVICE WAS
SMALLER THAN THOSE USED EARLIER
BULL IT PACKED MORE EXPLOSIVE
PUNCH.
THE TEST CAME JUST WEEKS AFTER A
U.N. SECURITY COUNCIL VOTE
IMPOSING ADDITIONAL SANCTIONS
AGAINST NORTH KOREA.
THAT U.N. ACTION FOLLOWED NORTH
KOREA'S LAUNCH OF A SATELLITE IN
DECEMBER.
THE U.S. AND OTHERS HAD WARNED
THAT THE ROCKET COULD ALSO BE
USED TO CARRY NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
TODAY'S NUCLEAR TEST SENT THE
U.N. SECURITY COUNCIL BACK INTO
EMERGENCY MEETINGS TO DISCUSS
YET MORE SANCTIONS.
U.S. AMBASSADOR SUSAN RICE.
>> THE ACTIONS OF NORTH KOREA
ARE A THREAT TO REGIONAL PEACE
AND SECURITY, INTERNATIONAL
PEACE AND SECURITY.
THEY ARE NOT ACCEPTABLE.
THEY WILL NOT BE TOLERATED.
AND THEY WILL BE MET WITH NORTH
KOREA'S INCREASING ISOLATION AND
PRESSURE UNDER UNITED STATES
SANCTIONS.
>> Brown: IN WASHINGTON A STATE
DEPARTMENT OFFICIAL CONFIRMED
THAT PONG JIANG HAD INFORMED THE
U.S. OF ITS INTENTION TO TEST A
NUCLEAR DEVICE BUT HAD GIVEN NO
DATE.
OTHER NATIONS JOINED IN A WAVE
OF CONDEMNATION INCLUDING THE
RUSSIAN FOREIGN MINISTER WHO WAS
IN SOUTH AFRICA.
>> FROM WHAT WE HAVE HEARD
TODAY, PYONGYANG VIOLATED ITS
COMMITMENT AND DESERVES
CONDEMNATION BECAUSE IT IGNORED
THE NORMS OF INTERNATIONAL LAWS.
>> Brown: EVEN CHINA, THE
NORTH'S LONE MAJOR ALLY VOICED
ITS, QUOTE, STAUNCH OPPOSITION.
IT URGED NORTH KOREA TO RETURN
TO ITS SIX PARTY TALKS ON ITS
NUCLEAR PROGRAM STALLED SINCE
2008 BUT PYONGYANG HAS CONTINUED
ITS NUCLEAR WORK DESPITE ENTER
SMAT PRESSURE.
WITH TODAY'S TEST, THE COUNTRY'S
YOUNG LEADER KIM JONG-UN
DIRECTLY CHALLENGED OTHER
LEADERS IN NEIGHBORING NATIONS
INCLUDING SOUTH KOREA, JAPAN AND
CHINA.
BACK IN WASHINGTON, OUTGOING
DEFENSE SECRETARY LEON PANETTA
WARNED THAT THOSE COUNTRIES AND
THE USES WILL HAVE TO CONTEND
WITH, QUOTE, ROGUE STATES FOR
SOME TIME.
>> YOU JUST SAW WHAT NORTH KOREA
HAS DONE IN THESE LAST FEW
WEEKS.
THE MISSILE TEST AND NOW A
NUCLEAR TEST.
THEY REPRESENT A SERIOUS THREAT
TO THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
WE'VE GOT TO BE PREPARED TO DEAL
WITH THAT.
>> Steven: NORTH KOREA'S OWN
PUBLIC STATEMENT INSISTED
TODAY'S TEST WAS ONLY A FIRST
RESPONSE.
IT SAID IT WILL BE ADDITIONAL
ACTIONS TO COME BUT GAVE NO
SPECIFICS.
>> Brown: AND I'M JOINED BY
AMBASSADOR CHARLES "JACK"
PRITCHARD, FORMER U.S. SPECIAL
ENVOY FOR NORTH KOREA
NEGOTIATONS UNDER PRESIDENT
GEORGE W. BUSH.
AND JAMES ACTON, A SENIOR
ASSOCIATE IN THE NUCLEAR POLICY
PROGRAM AT THE CARNEGIE
ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL
PEACE.
AMBASSADOR PRITCHARD, I GUESS
ONE OBVIOUS QUESTION IS WHY NOW?
>> IT'S A GREAT QUESTION.
AND I USUALLY START BY SAYING
WHY NOT NOW?
LET ME EXPLAIN THAT.
NORTH KOREANS HAVE A VERY MATURE
AND SERIOUS NUCLEAR WEAPON AND A
MISSILE TECHNOLOGY PROGRAM.
THEY'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO DO
THE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT.
WHEN THE TIME COMES THAT THEY'RE
READY TO DO A TEST, THEY'RE
GOING TO DO THAT UNLESS THERE IS
A POLITICAL OR A FOREIGN POLICY
REASON FOR THEM NOT TO DO IT.
>> I MEAN THERE'S BEEN THE
QUESTIONS ABOUT RESPONDING TO
SANCTIONS.
I MEAN EVEN TODAY PEOPLE ARE
WONDERING, IS IT TIED TO STATE
OF THE UNION.
IS IT SORT OF A DIRECT, YOU
KNOW, PUSH AGAINST THE U.S.?
>> I DON'T THINK SO.
I MEAN, IN 2009 WE HEARD THIS
EXACT SAME THING.
IT WAS A CONDEMNATION OF THEIR
APRIL 2009 MISSILE LAUNCH.
THE NORTH KOREANS SIX WEEKS
LATER CONDUCTED A SECOND NUCLEAR
TEST IN WHICH THEY SAID IT WAS
BECAUSE OF THE CONDEMNATION THAT
OCCURRED OVER THEIR MISSILE
TESTS.
YOU KNOW, THE RESPONSE TO THAT
IS THAT'S NONSENSE.
NOBODY CONDUCTS NUCLEAR TESTS
BECAUSE THEY'VE BEEN CHASTISED
OVER A MISSILE TEST.
MORE SPECIFICALLY, I WOULD SAY
IF YOU'RE LOOKING AT A
CONCURRENCE OF TIME, IT'S NOT
THE STATE OF THE UNION.
IT'S THE TWO WEEKS PRIOR TO THE
INAUGURATION OF A NEW SOUTH
KOREAN PRESIDENT.
>> Brown: TO ANOTHER PART OF THE
WORLD.
WE'LL GET BACK TO THAT.
LET ME ASK JAMES ACTON, THE
NORTH KOREAN OFFICIAL NEWS
AGENCY REFERRED TO THIS AS A
MINIATURIZED AND LIGHTER NUCLEAR
DEVICE WITH GREATER EXPLOSIVE
FORCE THAN PREVIOUSLY.
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
WHAT CAN WE TELL ABOUT THE
ACTUAL DEVICE?
>> GOOD EVENING, JEFF.
MOST PEOPLE BELIEVE THAT
PYONGYANG'S LONG-TERM GOAL IS
DEVELOPING A BALLISTIC MISSILE
ALONG WITH A NUCLEAR WAR HEAD
THAT CAN THREATEN THE UNITED
STATES.
IN ORDER TO DO THAT, YOU NEED A
MILITARIZED PHYSICALLY SMALLER
AND LIGHTER NUCLEAR DEVICE.
PYONGYANG IS CLAIMING THAT IT'S
SUCCESSFULLY DONE THAT.
WHAT I WANT TO EMPHASIZE IS WE
DON'T HAVE ANY KIND OF
INDEPENDENT CONFIRMATION OF THAT
AT THE MOMENT.
ALL WE KNOW FROM THE SEISMIC AND
THE SHAKING OF THE EARTH AFTER
THE TEST, THIS WAS AN EXPLOSION.
WHAT WE DON'T KNOW IS THE SIZE
OF THE DEVICE.
WE DON'T KNOW THE MATERIAL FROM
WHICH THE DEVISE WAS MADE.
IN FACT, WE DON'T EVEN KNOW
DEFINITIVELY THAT THIS WAS
LARGER THAN THE PREVIOUS TWO
TESTS.
IT PROBABLY WAS.
BUT IT WOULD TAKE SOME TIME FOR
THE SEISMOLOGISTS TO ESTIMATE
THE YIELD ACCURATELY.
>> Brown: DO WE KNOW, TO SAY
ANYMORE ABOUT THE BOTTOM-LINE
QUESTION HERE WHICH IS HOW MUCH
OF A THREAT ARE THEY, TO THE
REGION AND ULTIMATELY TO THE
LARGER... THE REST OF THE WORLD
INCLUDING THE U.S.?
>> WELL, I THINK THE TEST TODAY
MARKS A QUANTITATIVE CHANGE.
IT DEMONSTRATES THAT PYONGYANG
IS MOVING ALONG ITS ARC OF
DEVELOPING NUCLEAR WEAPONS THAT
CAN THREATEN THE UNITED STATES.
IT ALREADY HAS BALLISTIC
MISSILES THAT CAN THREATEN THE
REGION.
IF IT CAN FIT A NUCLEAR WAR HEAD
ON TO THOSE, THEN IT CAN
DIRECTLY THREATEN SOME OF ITS
NEIGHBORS.
IT DOESN'T MARK A FUNDAMENTALLY
NEW DEPARTURE.
NORTH KOREA HAS TESTED NUCLEAR
WEAPONS AND PLENTY OF MISSILES.
TODAY MARKS AN INTENSIFICATION
OF THREAT RATHER THAN A
FUNDAMENTAL CHANGE IN THE NATURE
OF THE THREAT.
>> Brown: YOU MENTIONED,
AMBASSADOR PRITCHARD, SOUTH
KOREA.
I ALSO WANT TO BRING UP... OF
COURSE, THE WORLD CONDEMNED THIS
RIGHT AWAY.
THE MOST INTERESTING PERHAPS WAS
CHINA WHICH HAD EXPLICITLY
CALLED ON NORTH KOREA NOT TO
TAKE THIS STEP.
WHAT DOES THAT TELL YOU?
>> WELL, TAKE A LOOK OVER THE
LAST SIX-AND-A-HALF YEARS SINCE
THE FIRST NORTH KOREAN NUCLEAR
DEBT NATION IN OCTOBER OF 2006.
THE CHINESE CAME OUT MUCH
STRONGER THEN.
THEY HAD COME OUT AND
UNANIMOUSLY JOINED THE OTHERS AT
THE SECURITY COUNCIL CONDEMNING
THE NORTH KOREANS ON SEVERAL
OCCASIONS NOW.
SO THEY'VE DEVELOPED A PATTERN
OF TRYING TO WARN OFF NORTH
KOREA FROM DOING THIS BUT
ULTIMATELY THEY ARE NOT GOING TO
UNILATERALLY APPLY THE TYPE OF
PRESSURE THAT WOULD CAUSE THE
NORTH KOREANS TO END ITS MISSILE
AND NUCLEAR PROGRAMS.
>> Brown: THE NORTH KOREANS
THINK THEY CAN GO AHEAD...
>> THE NORTH KOREANS UNDERSTAND
THE CALCULATIONS THAT THE
CHINESE HAVE MADE.
THEY KNOW EXACTLY HOW FAR THEY
CAN GO.
>> Brown: DO THEY...
ONE OF THE QUESTIONS, IF I
MAY, IS WE GOT NEW LEADERSHIP IN
CHINA, SO THE QUESTION BECOMES,
WILL HE TAKE ON WHAT
CONVENTIONAL WISDOM SAYS WILL BE
A STATUS CO- APPROACH TO NORTH
KOREA OR IS HE GOING TO BE A
LITTLE BIT MORE ANGRY, IF YOU
WILL, AT THE NORTH KOREANS AND
HOW IS THAT GOING TO MANIFEST
ITSELF?
>> NEW LEADERSHIP IN CHINA.
NEW LEADERSHIP IN SOUTH KOREA.
NEW LEADERSHIP IN JAPAN.
OF COURSE A NEW LEADER IN NORTH
KOREA.
>> ALSO PARTLY A NEW REGIME IN
THE UNITED STATES.
YOU'VE GOT SECRETARY KERRY WHO
WILL COME AT THIS IN A SLIGHTLY
DIFFERENT POINT OF VIEW THAN HIS
PREDECESSOR.
WE'LL HAVE TO SEE HOW THAT PLAYS
OUT AS WELL.
>> WHAT'S THE SORT OF DETECTIVE
WORK THAT HAPPENS NOW TO FIGURE
OUT MORE ABOUT THE THINGS WE
DON'T KNOW?
HOW ABOUT PARTICULAR TEST.
>> RIGHT.
AS I MENTIONED PREVIOUSLY, ALL
WE KNOW IS THERE'S BEEN A TEST.
WE HAVE A VERY ROUGH ESTIMATE OF
HOW BIG THE BANG WAS.
WHAT WE DON'T KNOW IS WHETHER
THE DEVICE WAS MADE FROM
PLUTONIUM OR HIGHLY ENRICHED
URANIUM.
THAT SOUNDS LIKE A MINOR
TECHNICAL ISSUE BUT IT ACTUALLY
HAS HUGELY IMPORTANT POLICY
CONSEQUENCES.
NORTH KOREA ONLY HAS A SMALL
AMOUNT OF PLUTONIUM.
IT ACTUALLY WOULD BE VERY, VERY
HARD FOR IT TO PRODUCE MORE.
SO PART OF THE REASON WHY NORTH
KOREA WANTS TO SHIFT TO URANIUM
IS BECAUSE IT WOULD ALLOW IT TO
INCREASE ITS ARSENAL RELATIVELY
QUICKLY.
SO IF THIS TURNS OUT TO BE A
HIGHLY ENRICHED URANIUM TEST,
THEN NORTH KOREA HAS
DEMONSTRATED ITS ABILITY TO
EXPAND ITS ARSENAL.
SO A LOT OF COUNTRIES INCLUDING
THE UNITED STATES ARE GOING TO
BE USING RADIATION DETECTORS TO
SNIFF THE AIR TO SEE IF THERE'S
ANY LEAKAGE FROM THE TEST.
AND WORK OUT FROM THOSE
RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS WHAT IT
CAN LEARN ABOUT THE NATURE OF
THE DEVICE THAT WAS DETONATED.
>> Brown: THIS IS RELATIVELY
EASY TO FIGURE OUT ONCE YOU GET
THE DETECTORS?
>> I MEAN, YOU KNOW, FIRSTLY,
THERE'S NO GUARANTEE THERE WILL
BE LEAKAGE OF MATERIAL.
SECONDLY, EVEN IF THERE IS,
THERE'S NO GUARANTEE YOU'RE
DETECTED.
YOU KNOW, WE DIDN'T DETECT ANY
MATERIAL FROM THE 2009 TEST.
IF YOU DO DETECT IT, THEN IT'S
QUITE LIKELY THAT YOU'LL BE ABLE
TO DISTINGUISH BETWEEN HIGHLY
ENRICHED URANIUM AND PLUTONIUM.
IT'S POSSIBLE BUT NOT COMPLETELY
GUARANTEED BY ANY MEANS THAT YOU
MIGHT BE ABLE TO GET SOME
INDICATION OF THE DESIGN OF THE
DEVICE.
BUT THAT WILL JUST EDUCATED
GUESSWORK AND DON'T EXPECT
GOVERNMENTS TO BE FORTH COMING
ABOUT THAT.
>> LET ME ASK YOU BRIEFLY AS THE
U.N. GOES BACK INTO SESSION TO
LOOK AT SANCTIONS, WHAT MORE CAN
BE DONE AT THIS POINT?
>> VERY LITTLE ON AN
INTERNATIONAL SCALE.
IN 2009 THEY CAME OUT WITH SOME
VERY GOOD SANCTIONS, BUT IT
DIDN'T REALLY INFLUENCE THE
NORTH KOREANS' ACTIONS.
I DON'T THINK THERE'S ANY
MARGINAL ADDITION TO THE
SANCTIONS THAT ARE IN PLACE.
THEY'RE GOING TO CALL ON THE
NORTH KOREANS TO BLINK, IF YOU
WILL.
VERY LITTLE FROM AN
INTERNATIONAL POINT OF VIEW.
NECESSARY BUT WON'T PRODUCE AN
OUTCOME.
>> Brown: AMBASSADOR JACK
PRITCHARD AND JAMES ACTON, THANK
YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: WE HAVE MORE ABOUT
TODAY'S NUCLEAR TEST ON OUR WEB
SITE, INCLUDING A DISPATCH ON
REACTION IN SEOUL, SOUTH KOREA,
FROM OUR PARTNER GLOBAL POST,
PLUS LINKS TO PREVIOUSEWSH NOUR
STORIES ON NORTH KOREA.
AND STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR, WHITE HOUSE SPOKESMAN
JAY CARNEY; PALM OIL PRODUCTION
IN MALAYSIA; OSAMA BIN LADEN'S
KILLER; PLUS, SHIELDS AND
BROOKS.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: THE MANHUNT FOR
A FORMER LOS ANGELES POLICEMAN
ERUPTED INTO A FIREFIGHT TODAY.
AUTHORITIES SAID CHRISTOPHER
DORNER, WANTED FOR THREE
MURDERS, HAS BARRICADED HIMSELF
IN A CABIN IN THE BIG BEAR LAKE
AREA, 80 MILES EAST OF THE CITY.
WHEN POLICE SHOWED UP, GUNFIRE
BROKE OUT.
EY RECEIVED INFORMATION
FROM THE PERSON REPORTING THAT
THE STOLEN VEHICLE WAS STOLEN BY
AN INDIVIDUAL THAT APPEARED TO
BE VERY SIMILAR TO CHRISTOPHER
DORNER.
IMMEDIATELY WE CONDUCTED A
GROUND AND AIR SEARCH FOR THIS
VEHICLE.
THEY WERE ABLE TO LOCATE IT AT
HIGHWAY 38 AND GLASS ROADS WHERE
THE SUSPECT IN THE VEHICLE FLED
INTO THE FOREST.
SHORTLY THEREAFTER, THIS
INDIVIDUAL BARRICADED HIMSELF IN
ONE OF THE CABINS THERE AND AN
EXCHANGE OF GUN FIRE OCCURRED.
DURING THAT EXCHANGE OF GUN
FIRE, TWO OFFICERS WERE INJURED.
>> Sreenivasan: WE GET MORE FROM
PUBLIC RADIO.
THE REPORTER SPOKE TO US A SHORT
WHILE AGO FROM THE SCENE OF THE
ACTIVITY.
FRANK, THANKS FOR JOINING US.
BRING US UP TO SPEED.
WHAT HAPPENED TODAY?
>> WELL, IT WAS IN THE EARLY
AFTERNOON THAT A POLICE GOT
REPORTS OF A TRUCK BEING
COMMANDEERED IN THE BIG BEAR
AREA.
NOW, THIS SUSPECT'S TRUCK HAD
BEEN FOUND THERE A FEW DAYS
EARLIER BURNED OUT.
THIS TRUCK THAT HE WAS DRIVING
APPARENTLY COMMANDEERED, AND THE
POLICE TOOK AFTER HIM AND CHASED
HIM INTO THE WOODS INTO A CABIN.
THEY HAVE HIM SURROUNDED NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT HAS HE BEEN
DOING FOR THE PAST COUPLE OF
DAYS?
HOW DID HE GET ACCESS TO THIS
TRUCK?
>> WELL, HE COMMANDEERED THE
TRUCK FROM A COUPLE OF WOMEN.
FOR THE LAST FEW DAYS POLICE
HAVE BEEN IN A MASSIVE MANHUNT
IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.
HUNDREDS AND HUNDREDS OF
OFFICERS LOOKING FOR HIM.
AND THERE WAS A LOT OF QUESTION
BECAUSE HIS BURNED-OUT TRUCK WAS
FOUND IN THE BIG BEAR AREA A FEW
DAYS AGO.
THERE WAS A HUGE SNOWSTORM AND
PEOPLE WERE WONDERING HOW COULD
HE SURVIVE OUT IN THIS
SNOWSTORM?
THERE HAVE BEEN REPORTS THAT HE
WAS HELD UP IN ONE OF THE CABINS
NOT FAR FROM THE COMMAND POST
WHERE POLICE WERE.
THEN HE SHOWS UP TODAY ON A
MOUNTAIN ROAD IN THIS
COMMANDEERED TRUCK THAT HE HAS
TAKEN TO THIS CABIN, THIS REMOTE
CABIN.
>> Sreenivasan: I'VE HEARD THE
AUDIO FILE OF A FIRE FIGHT
TODAY.
WHAT HAPPENED?
>> TWO POLICE OFFICERS -- WE'RE
NOT SURE WHAT AGENCY JUST YET --
WOUNDED BY THE SUSPECT ACCORDING
TO POLICE.
WE DON'T KNOW THEIR CONDITION.
BUT THERE WAS THIS FIRE FIGHT
THAT TOOK PLACE.
SWAT OFFICERS FROM AROUND
SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA HAVE BEEN IN
THE BIG BEAR AREA HEAVILY ARMED.
OF COURSE DORNER HIMSELF A
FORMER POLICE OFFICER HEAVILY
ARMED HIMSELF ACCORDING TO
POLICE.
>> Sreenivasan: FRANK FROM
SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA PUBLIC RADIO
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
Sreenivasan: IN IRAN THE
GOVERNMENT SAID
IN IRAN, THE GOVERNMENT SAID
TODAY IT IS READY FOR A
"COMPREHENSIVE AGREEMENT" ON
ALLOWING U.N. INSPECTIONS OF ITS
NUCLEAR SITES.
BUT IT SAID THE WEST MUST
RECOGNIZE ITS RIGHT TO CONTINUE
A NUCLEAR PROGRAM.
THE COUNTRY'S FOREIGN MINISTER
SAID THE U.S. AND OTHERS HAVE NO
RIGHT TO CRITICIZE IRAN OR NORTH
KOREA.
.
>> AS LONG AS THOSE WHO ISSUE
WARNINGS ARE THEMSELVES
VIOLATORS OF INTERNATIONAL LAW
THEY CANNOT EXPECT TO HAVE A
WORLD FREE OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
WE BELIEVE THERE SHOULD BE A
COLLECTIVE AND INTERNATIONAL
MOVEMENT TO DESTROY ALL WEAPONS
OF MASS DESTRUCTION SO THAT
EVERYONE WILL BE ABLE TO USE THE
LATEST SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
FOR PEACEFUL PURPOSES.
>> Sreenivasan: IRAN HAS
INSISTED ITS NUCLEAR PROGRAM IS
FOR POWER GENERATION.
THE U.S. SAYS TEHRAN IS BENT ON
BUILDING NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS SET TO BRING
HOME 34,000 U.S. TROOPS FROM
AFGHANISTAN BY THIS TIME NEXT
YEAR.
WHITE HOUSE AND PENTAGON
OFFICIALS CONFIRMED IT TODAY.
THE DECISION MARKS THE NEXT
PHASE IN THE ADMINISTRATION'S
PLAN TO END THE U.S. COMBAT ROLE
IN AFGHANISTAN BY 2014.
THERE ARE CURRENTLY 66,000
AMERICAN TROOPS IN AFGHANISTAN,
DOWN FROM A PEAK OF 100,000.
A SHARPLY DIVIDED SENATE ARMED
SERVICES COMMITTEE MOVED TODAY
TO APPROVE CHUCK HAGEL FOR
DEFENSE SECRETARY.
THE PARTY LINE VOTE ON THE
FORMER SENATOR WAS 14-11.
HIS FELLOW REPUBLICANS
CHALLENGED HAGEL'S PAST
STATEMENTS AND VOTES ON ISRAEL,
IRAQ AND IRAN'S NUCLEAR WEAPONS
PROGRAM, WHILE DEMOCRATS ARGUED
HAGEL WAS MORE THAN QUALIFIED.
>> I JUST BELIEVE THAT THE
TESTIMONY OF SENATOR HAGEL WAS
NOT REASSURING.
I DON'T THINK HE DID COME ACROSS
CLEAR AND CONVINCING, THAT HE
UNDERSTOOD OUR POLICIES TOWARD
IRAN.
AND THE FACT THAT YOU DON'T
UNDERSTAND WHY AND YOU CAN'T
CLEARLY ARTICULATE THE BAD NEWS
FOR AMERICA FOR THE IRANIANS'
NUCLEAR CAPABILITY SHARPLY AND
TO THE POINT IS UNNERVING AND
FOR THE TIMES IN WHICH WE LIVE.
>> THE CONCERN THAT I HAVE IS
THE SUGGESTION THAT THIS MAN WHO
HAS SERVED HIS COUNTRY REALLY
SINCE HE WAS A YOUNG MAN AND
ENLISTED IN VIETNAM IS NOT
QUALIFIED TO BE THE SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE.
I THINK IT'S JUST NOT ACCURATE
AND REFLECTS CERTAINLY A
DIFFERENT UNDERSTANDING OF HIS
BACKGROUND AND HIS EXPERIENCE
THAN I HAVE.
>> Sreenivasan: DEMOCRATS WANT A
FULL SENATE VOTE LATER THIS
WEEK, BUT REPUBLICANS COULD
DELAY IT.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT RAN A
BUDGET SURPLUS IN JANUARY, AFTER
A TEMPORARY CUT IN PAYROLL TAXES
EXPIRED.
THAT WORD CAME AS THE
CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE
FORECAST A DEFICIT OF $845
BILLION, THE SMALLEST SINCE
PRESIDENT OBAMA TOOK OFFICE.
AT THE SAME TIME, THE HEAD OF
THE C.B.O. WARNED CONGRESS THAT
ECONOMIC GROWTH COULD BE CUT IN
HALF, IF ACROSS-THE-BOARD
SPENDING CUTS TAKE EFFECT NEXT
MONTH.
PASSENGERS ON A DISABLED CRUISE
SHIP CAMPED ON THE DECKS TODAY
AS THE VESSEL WAS TOWED TOWARD
MOBILE, ALABAMA.
MORE THAN 4,200 PASSENGERS AND
CREW ARE ON THE CARNIVAL CRUISE
LINES SHIP.
BUT THEY'VE HAD NO VENTILATION
OR WORKING TOILETS SINCE A
WEEKEND FIRE KNOCKED OUT POWER.
THE SHIP IS EXPECTED TO ARRIVE
IN MOBILE BY THURSDAY.
ON WALL STREET, BLUE CHIPS WERE
UP, WHILE TECH STOCKS GAVE A
LITTLE GROUND.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 47 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
14,018.
THE NASDAQ FELL FIVE POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3186.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JUDY.
>> Woodruff: WHAT CAN THE NATION
EXPECT FROM PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
STATE OF THE UNION SPEECH
TONIGHT?
I SPOKE WITH WHITE HOUSE PRESS
SECRETARY JAY CARNEY A SHORT
TIME AGO.
JAY CARNEY, THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
LET ME BEGIN BY ASKING WHAT DOES
THE PRESIDENT WANT TO ACCOMPLISH
TONIGHT?
>> JUDY, TONIGHT HE WANTS TO
MAKE CLEAR TO THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE THAT HIS NUMBER-ONE
PRIORITY IS WHAT IT HAS ALWAYS
BEEN SINCE HE BEGAN RUNNING FOR
THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENCY
BACK IN 2007.
THAT IS, THE NEED TO GROW THE
ECONOMY AND REBUILD AND
STRENGTHEN THE MIDDLE CLASS
BECAUSE THE MIDDLE CLASS HAS
ALWAYS BEEN THE ENGINE OF OUR
ECONOMIC GROWTH.
WHEN THE MIDDLE CLASS DOES WELL,
WHEN OUR ECONOMY GROWS FROM THE
MIDDLE OUT INSTEAD OF THE TOP
DOWN, AMERICA DOES BETTER.
THAT'S REALLY BEEN THE FOCUS OF
HIS ENERGIES ON DOMESTIC POLICY
SINCE, LIKE I SAID, THE TIME HE
BEGAN RUNNING FOR THIS OFFICE.
IT WAS THE FOCUS OF SO MUCH WHAT
HE DID IN HIS FIRST TERM.
IT REMAINS THE FOCUS BECAUSE THE
RECESSION THAT WAS IN FULL BLOOM
WHEN HE TOOK OFFICE IN JANUARY
OF 2009 COST THIS ECONOMY ALMOST
NINE MILLION JOBS.
AND DUG A HEUBLG HOLE OUT OF
WHICH WE'VE BEEN CLIMBING EVER
SINCE.
WE'VE ACHIEVED A LOT.
OVER SIX MILLION PRIVATE SECTOR
JOBS.
QUARTER AFTER QUARTER OF
ECONOMIC GROWTH.
THERE'S MORE WORK TO DO.
WHAT YOU'LL HEAR IS A PLAN FROM
THE PRESIDENT TO GET THAT DONE.
MORE JOBS, MORE GROWTH.
>> Woodruff: WHEN IT COMES TO
THE ECONOMY AND THE FISCAL
HEALTH OF THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT, WE KNOW THAT HOUSE
SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER TOLD
REPORTERS TODAY THAT THE
PRESIDENT IN HIS WORDS DOESN'T
HAVE THE GUTS TO TACKLE THE
SERIOUS PROBLEM OF THE DEBT
FACING THIS COUNTRY, THAT HE'S
NOT WILLING TO TAKE ON HIS OWN
PARTY WHEN IT COMES TO REDUCING
OR RATHER RAISING THE
ELIGIBILITY AGE FOR MEDICARE.
>> I THINK IT'S UNFORTUNATE THAT
THE NAME-CALLING ON THE EVE OF
THE STATE OF THE UNION.
I THINK IT'S INTERESTING COMING
FROM THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE
WHO IN A SERIES OF NEGOTIATIONS
WITH THE PRESIDENT HAS WALKED
AWAY FROM COMPROMISE PROPOSALS
THAT THE PRESIDENT HAS PUT
FORWARD AS RECENTLY AS THE END
OF LAST YEAR.
THE PRESIDENT PUT FORWARD A
BROAD DEFICIT REDUCTION PACKAGE
THAT REPRESENTED SOME VERY TOUGH
CHOICES FOR DEMOCRATS, IN VERY
TOUGH PILLS TO SWALLOW FOR
DEMOCRATS.
JOHN BOEHNER, ON THE OTHER HAND,
NEVER DID PUT FORWARD A PROPOSAL
THAT HAD THE SUPPORT OR THAT HE
COULD LEAD HIS PARTY TO SUPPORT.
THAT'S UNFORTUNATE.
BUT THE PRESIDENT WILL, YOU
KNOW, MAKE CLEAR AGAIN TONIGHT
AS HE HAS EVER SINCE THAT THOSE
IDEAS THAT HE PUT ON THE TABLE
WITH HIS... IN HIS NEGOTIATIONS
THE SPEAKER REMAIN ON THE TABLE.
HE'S COMMITTED TO GETTING THIS
DONE IN A BIPARTISAN WAY.
WE NEED TO BALANCE OR RATHER
REDUCE OUR DEFICIT A BALANCED
WAY THAT DOESN'T PUT ALL THE
BURDEN ON SENIORS OR MIDDLE
CLASS FAMILIES TRYING TO SEND
THEIR KIDS TO COLLEGE.
BUT THAT REDUCES SPENDING IN A
WAY THAT IS FAIR AND THAT ASKS
THE WEALTHIEST TO DO THEIR FAIR
SHARE.
>> Woodruff: BUT IT'S NOT JUST
THE HOUSE SPEAKER AND
REPUBLICANS.
IT'S THE BIPARTISAN GROUP CALLED
"FIX THE DEBT."
THEY PUT OUT A STATEMENT THIS
AFTERNOON SAYING THEY ARE
DISAPPOINTED THAT THE PRESIDENT
ISN'T PREPARED TO LOOK AT
SERIOUS REFORMS OF THE SO-CALLED
ENTITLEMENTS.
AGAIN ON RAISING... NOT BEING
WILLING TO RAISE THE ELIGIBILITY
AGE FOR MEDICARE, BRINGING THAT
TOPIC UP AGAIN.
WHY ISN'T THE PRESIDENT PREPARED
TO DO THAT?
>> WELL, IT'S SIMPLY FALSE THAT
THE PRESIDENT ISN'T PREPARED TO
DO SERIOUS ENTITLEMENT REFORM.
IN FACT, HE IS.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT HE PUT ON
THE TABLE IN HIS NEGOTIATIONS
WITH SPEAKER BOEHNER LATE LAST
YEAR WAS A WILLINGNESS TO DO
SO-CALLED CHAIN C.P.I., TO
ADJUST THE COST OF LIVING
ADJUSTMENT TO APPLIES TO A
VARIETY OF PROGRAMS INCLUDING
SOCIAL SECURITY AS PART OF A
COMPREHENSIVE DEFICIT REDUCTION
DEAL THAT INCLUDES REVENUES.
HE PUT ON THE TABLE A
WILLINGNESS TO MEANS TEST
MEDICARE PREMIUMS.
AGAIN AN IDEA THAT DOES NOT SIT
WELL WITH A LOT OF DEMOCRATS BUT
HE BELIEVES IS WORTH DOING AS
PART OF A COMPREHENSIVE BALANCED
APPROACH TO DEFICIT REDUCTION.
>> Woodruff: LET ME ASK YOU
ABOUT GUN CONTROL.
THAT'S ANOTHER SUBJECT WE KNOW
THE PRESIDENT IS GOING TO BRING
UP TONIGHT.
DOES HE LOOK TO MAKE... TO REACH
SOME SORT OF COMPROMISE THERE?
WE KNOW THERE ARE DEEP DIVISIONS
IN BOTH POLITICAL PARTIES.
OVER WHAT TO DO ABOUT GUNS.
AND WHAT DOES THE WHITE HOUSE
HOPE TO ACCOMPLISH BY BRINGING A
NUMBER OF EITHER VICTIMS OF GUN
VIOLENCE TO THE STATE OF THE
UNION TONIGHT OR THEIR
RELATIVES, FAMILY MEMBERS?
>> I THINK THE POINT THAT HE'S
TRYING TO MAKE IS THAT GUN
VIOLENCE IS A PROBLEM THAT FACES
ALL OF US.
IT IS A PROBLEM IN THIS COUNTRY
THAT WE NEED AND CAN ADDRESS
TOGETHER.
IT SHOULDN'T BE JUST AN
IDEOLOGICAL DEBATE BETWEEN
LOBBIES IN WASHINGTON.
IT SHOULD BE A CONVERSATION OUT
IN THE COUNTRY BECAUSE IT
AFFECTS EVERYONE.
AND THE COMPREHENSIVE SET OF
PROPOSALS THAT THE PRESIDENT
ANNOUNCED SEVERAL WEEKS AGO TO
REDUCE GUN VIOLENCE IN AMERICA,
PROPOSALS THAT INCLUDE
LEGISLATIVE ACTION IN CONGRESS
AS WELL AS EXECUTIVE ACTION, 23
EXECUTIVE ACTIONS FROM THE
ADMINISTRATION, REPRESENTS AN
EFFORT TO DEAL WITH GUN VIOLENCE
IN A COMMON SENSE WAY.
NOT A SINGLE PROPOSAL THAT THE
PRESIDENT HAS PUT FORWARD WOULD
TAKE A SINGLE FIREARM AWAY FROM
A SINGLE LAW-ABIDING AMERICAN
CITIZEN.
BECAUSE HE BELIEVES IN SECOND
AMENDMENT RIGHTS BUT HE BELIEVES
WE OUGHT TO TAKE ACTION,
SENSIBLE ACTION, TO REDUCE GUN
VIOLENCE IN THIS COUNTRY
BECAUSE, AS WE ALL SAW IN
NEWTOWN, CONNECTICUT, THE HORROR
OF WHAT HAPPENED THERE, I THINK
WILL STAY WITH ALL OF US
FOREVER.
UNFORTUNATELY AS WE'VE SEEN
AGAIN AND AGAIN IT HAPPENS ALL
TOO OFTEN IN THIS COUNTRY.
>> Woodruff: WE KNOW THE
PRESIDENT WILL BE FOLLOWING UP
THE STATE OF THE UNION BY MAKING
A TRIP TO NORTH CAROLINA.
HE'S GOING TO BE GOING TO
ATLANTA AND THEN TO CHICAGO
LATER THIS WEEK.
WE'RE READING TODAY NOT JUST
REPUBLICANS BUT DEMOCRATS
PRIVATELY ARE SAYING, WE
THINK... WE WORRY THE PRESIDENT
IS OUT THERE CAMPAIGNING, STILL
IN CAMPAIGN MODE WHEN HE REALLY
OUGHT TO BE SITTING DOWN WITH
LAWMAKERS HERE IN WASHINGTON TO
WORK OUT SOME OF THESE TOUGH
ISSUES.
>> I CERTAINLY HAVEN'T HEARD A
LOT OF DEMOCRATS SAYING THAT.
WHAT I WOULD SAY IS THAT THIS
PRESIDENT FIRMLY BELIEVES THAT
IT IS PART OF HIS OBLIGATION TO
THOSE WHO VOTED FOR HIM AND
THOSE WHO VOTED AGAINST HIM TO
GO OUT INTO THE COUNTRY AND
EXPLAIN WHAT HIS VISION IS,
EXPLAIN WHAT HIS AGENDA IS AND
TO RALLY SUPPORT FOR THE
PROPOSALS THAT HE'S PUT FORWARD.
PROPOSALS THAT ON ISSUE AFTER
ISSUE ALREADY ENJOY A MAJORITY
OF THE AMERICAN PEOPLE'S
SUPPORT.
IT'S SIMPLY NOT THE CASE THAT WE
SHOULD JUST HAVE THESE
CONVERSATIONS AMONG OURSELVES
HERE IN WASHINGTON.
THE PRESIDENT BELIEVES THAT WE
NEED TO GO OUT INTO THE COUNTRY
AND HAVE THE CONVERSATION WITH
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE.
I THINK WE'RE SELLING HIM SHORT
IF WE ASSUME THEY'RE NOT
INTERESTED IN CONVERSATIONS
ABOUT HOW WE REDUCE OUR DEFICIT
IN A BALANCED WAY, HOW WE TACKLE
COMPREHENSIVE IMMIGRATION
REFORM, HOW WE MEET THE
CHALLENGE OF GUN VIOLENCE IN
AMERICA.
THESE ARE CONVERSATIONS THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE DESPERATELY WANT
TO HAVE WITH THEIR LEADERS AND
THE PRESIDENT IS GOING OUT AND
HAVING THOSE CONVERSATIONS.
IT'S ALSO TRUE WHEN IT COMES TO
GETTING SOMETHING DONE IN
WASHINGTON.
WE HAVE LEARNED FROM HARD
EXPERIENCE THAT IT IS NOT JUST
ENOUGH TO SIT AROUND A TABLE
WITH CONGRESSIONAL LEADERS AND
TRY TO WORK OUT A NEGOTIATION.
IT IS VERY HELPFUL TO GO OUT AND
ENGAGE THE AMERICAN PEOPLE TO
MAKE SURE THEIR VOICES ARE HEARD
AND THAT THEIR PRIORITIES ARE
LISTENED TO HERE IN WASHINGTON.
THAT'S WHAT THE PRESIDENT IS
GOING TO DO.
HE'S GOING TO DO BOTH.
HE WILL CONTINUE TO WORK WITH
CONGRESS, CONTINUE TO NEGOTIATE
WITH CONGRESS AND CONTINUE TO
MEET WITH CONGRESS ON ISSUE
AFTER ISSUE.
BUT HE'S NOT GOING TO LEAVE THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE OUT OF THE
EQUATION.
>> Woodruff: WE HEAR YOU.
JAY CARNEY JOINING US FROM THE
WHITE HOUSE.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
I APPRECIATE IT.
>> Woodruff: ONLINE JOIN THE
DISCUSSION AROUND TONIGHT'S
FIND A LINK TO IT ON OUR HOME
PAGE.
NEWSHOUR POLITICAL EDITOR
CHRISTINA BELLANTONI WILL HOST A
GOOGLE-PLUS HANGOUT.
ALSO THERE, YOU CAN WATCH THE
NEWSHOUR'S SPECIAL COVERAGE OF
THE STATE OF THE UNION.
>> Brown: WE TURN NOW TO THE
STORY OF THE MAN CREDITED WITH
KILLING OSAMA BIN LADEN, AND THE
POST-MILITARY CHALLENGES HE'S
FACED.
RAY SUAREZ HAS MORE.
>> TONIGHT I CAN REPORT TO THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE AND TO THE WORLD
THAT THE UNITED STATES HAS
CONDUCTED AN OPERATION THAT
KILLED OSAMA BIN LADEN.
>> Suarez: MAY 1, 2011.
PRESIDENT OBAMA ANNOUNCES TO THE
WORLD THAT A TEN-YEAR MANHUNT IS
OVER.
THE FOUNDER AND FACE OF AL QAEDA
IS DEAD.
IN A LATE NIGHT RAID IN
PAKISTAN, A GROUP OF U.S. NAVY
SEALS, NOW WELL KNOWN AS SEAL
TEAM 6, HAD STORMED THE WALLED
COMPOUND WHERE BIN LADEN WAS
QUIETLY LIVING AND OPERATING.
NOW WRITING IN ESQUIRE MAGAZINE
PHIL BRONSTEIN OF THE CENTER OF
INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING HAS
TRACKED DOWN THE MAN CREDITED
WITH TAKING THE KILL SHOT WHO
HAS SINCE RETIRED FROM THE NAVY.
THE MAN DESCRIBED ONLY AS THE
SHOOTER TELLS OF HIS STRUGGLE.
NO PENSION.
DIFFICULTY FINDING EMPLOYMENT.
A LACK OF HEALTH INSURANCE.
AND NO SECURITY PROTECTION FOR
HIS FAMILY OR HIMSELF.
THE FORMER SEAL HASSLES FILED A
DISABILITY CLAIM WITH THE
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS
FOR SERVICE-RELATED INJURIES.
AVERAGE WAIT TIME FOR A DECISION
EXCEEDS NINE MONTHS.
WE REACHED OUT TO THE PENTAGON
FOR COMMENT ON THE ARTICLE.
A SPOKESPERSON THERE SAID,
QUOTE, WE'RE NOT RESPONDING TO
IT IN ANY WAY, EITHER TO CONFIRM
OR DENY ANYTHING.
FOR MORE ON THIS STORY I'M
JOINED BY THE ARTICLE'S AUTHOR
PHIL BRONSTEIN.
HE'S THE EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN OF
THE CENTER FOR INVESTIGATIVE
REPORTING.
WELCOME TO THE PROGRAM.
>> THANK YOU.
THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Suarez: THIS IS A MAN WHOSE
IDENTITY IS SECRET.
YOU CAN TELL FROM THE DEPARTMENT
OF DEFENSE THEY DON'T WANT TO
SAY ANYTHING ABOUT ANYTHING.
HOW DID YOU DETERMINE TO YOUR
OWN SATISFACTION THAT THE
SHOOTER IS WHO HE SAYS HE IS.
>> THIS IS A RELATIONSHIP THAT
STARTED ABOUT A YEAR AND A
QUARTER AGO THROUGH SOME MUTUAL
FRIENDS.
HE WAS INTRODUCED TO ME AS "THE
GUY," AS THEY LIKE TO CALL HIM.
LONG BEFORE I EVER MET HIM,
THESE WERE PEOPLE WHO HAD, FOR
INSTANCE, THERE WAS A PARTY OF
SEALS WHO HAD BEEN ON THAT
MISSION IN WASHINGTON A WEEK
AFTER THE MISSION.
AND I WASN'T THERE BUT HE WAS
THERE ALONG WITH OTHER FELLOW
SEALS WHO WERE ON THE BIN LADEN
MISSION.
THERE WAS A LOT OF CONVERSATION
ACKNOWLEDGING THAT HE WAS THE
SHOOTER.
AND OTHER MEMBERS OF HIS RED
TEAM SQUAD WERE CLEARLY IN
AGREEMENT WITH THAT.
I DID SPEAK WITH THREE DIFFERENT
PEOPLE WHO WERE AT THAT DINNER.
SOME MILITARY, SOME NOT.
AND THEN OVER TIME, I JUST, YOU
KNOW, I STARTED FINALLY STARTED
TALKING TO HIM DIRECTLY.
IT WAS A MATTER OF SORT OF
TRIANGULATION TO THE POINT WHERE
I FELT LIKE HE DEFINITELY THE
MOST CREDIBLE STORY ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENED.
THERE WERE ALSO LITTLE DETAILS
IN THERE, RAY.
I MEAN, HE TALKS ABOUT GOING IN
THE ROOM, ROLLING IN THE ROOM,
AS HE PUTS IT, AND BEING KIND OF
SHOCKED AT HOW TALL BIN LADEN
WAS AND HAVING TO RAISE HIS GUN
UP TO SHOOT HIM.
IT'S NOT THAT THOSE DETAILS
REALLY, YOU KNOW, VERIFIED
ANYTHING IN PARTICULAR EXCEPT
THAT THEY WERE DETAILS THAT
WERE... I THOUGHT WERE SOMEWHAT
TELLING.
>> Suarez: AT THE OUTSET, HE
DIDN'T KNOW WHAT HIS ROLE WOULD
BE IN THE OPERATION SO HE'S NOT
THE PERSON WHO CAME IN ON THAT
HELICOPTER KNOWING HE WOULD BE
THE PERSON WHO WOULD TAKE OUT
BIN LADEN DID HE?
>> HE DID NOT.
THEY ALL HAD ROLES.
HIS ORIGINAL ROLE HAD BEEN AS A
TEAM LEADER.
HE WAS GOING TO BE THE LEADER OF
THE EXTERIOR TEAM.
THAT WAS THE TEAM OF PEOPLE THAT
THEY DROP OUTSIDE OF THE
COMPOUND INITIALLY TO CHECK THE
PERIMETER.
THEY HAD AN INTERPRETER.
THEY HAD HAD SEVERAL SNIPERS AND
THEY HAD THIS DOG CAIRO.
THE IDEA WAS TO KEEP LOCAL
PAKISTANIS FROM THEN VIER ONS
AWAY WHICH THEY DID.
IT WASN'T THAT HARD IT TURNED
OUT.
HE WAS ORIGINALLY ON THAT TEAM
AND ACTUALLY MANAGED TO GET
HIMSELF TRANSFERRED TO THE TEAM
THAT WAS GOING TO BE FAST-ROPED
ON TO THE ROOF.
HE THOUGHT THEY NEEDED MORE
ASSAULTERS AND THAT WOULD GIVE
HIM AN OPPORTUNITY TO PERHAPS BE
ONE OF THE PEOPLE TO SHOOT BIN
LADEN.
AS IT TURNS OUT THEY GOT DROPPED
OFF OUTSIDE THE COMPOUND, HAD TO
BLOW THEIR WAY IN AND HAD TO
MAKE THEIR WAY UP THE STAIRS.
>> Suarez: YOU GET A RARE LOOK
INSIDE THAT BUILDING AS THE
OPERATION IS GOING DOWN.
BUT THEN THE ARTICLE PIVOTS AND
YOU LAMENT THE FACT THAT ONE OF
THE MOST DECORATED COMBAT
VETERANS OF OUR AGE WHO CAPPED
HIS CAREER BY TERMINATING BIN
LADEN HAS NO LANDING PAD IN
CIVILIAN LIFE.
WHAT IS HE UP TO NOW?
>> THERE IS SOMETHING IN THE
STORY.
I MEAN OBVIOUSLY WE DON'T GET
TOO SPECIFIC ABOUT HIM ENGAGING
IN SOME WHAT WE CALL DISCREET
CONSULTING.
HE'S NOT BROKE.
SINCE THE STORY CAME OUT
YESTERDAY PEOPLE HAVE TALKED
ABOUT, YOU KNOW, HERE'S A GUY
WHO IS BROKE BECAUSE IT'S A MORE
DRAMATIC WAY TO PUT IT.
HE'S NOT BROKE.
BUT HE DOES HAVE BILLS.
HE HAS A FAMILY THAT HE HAS TO
TAKE CARE OF.
HE HAS NO PENSION BECAUSE HE
LEFT BEFORE THE 20 YEARS THAT IT
NORMALLY TAKES FOR YOU TO
RETIRE.
AND HE'S, YOU KNOW, THE WORK
THAT HE'S DOING IS NOT
NECESSARILY CONSISTENT OR LONG
LASTING.
>> Suarez: NOT BROKE BUT
INSECURE.
IN HIS OWN WORDS.
>> VERY INSECURE ABOUT A NUMBER
OF THINGS.
HE'S INSECURE ABOUT HOW HE'S
GOING TO FEED HIS WIFE AND KIDS.
AGAIN DON'T MEAN THAT TO SOUND
LIKE HE'S OUT ON THE SIDEWALK.
AS WE ALL WORRY ABOUT OUR
FAMILIES.
BUT ALSO ABOUT SAFETY AND
SECURITY.
BECAUSE ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
HAPPENED IS WHEN THEY GOT BACK
FROM THE MISSION THEY HAD A
CONVERSATION.
WHAT IF THEIR NAME SHOULD COME
OUT?
SO THE PERSON WHO WROTE THE BOOK
"NO EASY DAY" UNDER A PSEUDONYM.
HIS REAL NAME CAME OUT
EVERYWHERE.
WITHIN A DAY OR TWO AFTER THAT
HIS PICTURE WAS ON A JIHADY
WEBSITE.
WHAT HAPPENED IS THE SEAL
COMMAND TOLD THE SHOOTER, YOU
KNOW, WE CAN PERHAPS GIVE YOU
SOME KIND OF WITNESS PROTECTION
PROGRAM.
WE DON'T HAVE IT YET.
WE HAVEN'T CREATED IT YET BUT WE
COULD.
AND SOMEONE PERHAPS HALF
JOKINGLY SAID TO HIM, "AND YOU
COULD DRIVE A BEER TRUCK IN
MILWAUKEE."
AND HE JUST FELT LIKE BEING PUT
IN A SITUATION AS THOUGH YOU
WERE... DIDN'T SEEM QUITE RIGHT
TO HIM.
>> Suarez: AFTER 16 YEARS OF
VERY INTENSE COMBAT AND HIGHLY
SKILLED WORK IN OUR MILITARY,
WAS THIS A CASE OF WILLFUL
NEGLECT OR JUST, AS MANY
SOLDIERS EXPERIENCE, A BAD
HAND-OFF FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE TO VETERANS AFFAIRS
WHERE YOU GO AFTER YOU'RE DONE
WITH YOUR ACTIVE DUTY SERVICE?
>> I THINK IT'S PROBABLY THE
LATTER, RAY.
I MEAN, I THINK IT'S HARD TO
IMAGINE ANYBODY WILLFULLY
CONDEMNING THESE GUYS NOT TO
HAVE A GOOD EXPERIENCE OUTSIDE
OF THE MILITARY.
I THINK THAT... I WORK AT THE
CENTER FOR INVESTIGATIVE
REPORTING.
WE'VE DONE A LOT OF REPORTING ON
HOW FOR ALL VETS COMING OUT --
ABOUT 200,000 A YEAR -- THAT THE
WAY FOR A DISABILITY CLAIM TO BE
ADJUDICATED IS AVERAGE NINE
MONTHS AND MUCH MORE IN SOME
OTHER AREAS.
THIS GUY HAS THAT ISSUE.
HE'S BEEN WAITING FOR HIS CLAIM.
HE FILED HIS CLAIM IN AUGUST, I
THINK.
STILL HASN'T HEARD ANYTHING
EXCEPT PLEASE STAND BY.
AND THERE'S NO... THERE'S REALLY
NO FACILITATION.
THERE'S NO ORGANIZING PRINCIPLE
FOR SOMEONE OF THAT KIND OF
STILL, THIS PARTICULAR SKILLS
THAT THESE GUYS HAVE, THE
TEAMWORK WHICH IS NOT
NECESSARILY THAT UNUSUAL BUT THE
LEVEL OF ACTIVITY THAT THEY DO.
THEY GO OUT ON MISSIONS.
THEY'RE VERY FOCUSED AND MAKE
DECISIONS UNDER THE MOST
DIFFICULT OF CIRCUMSTANCES.
THEY'VE BEEN DOING THIS STEADILY
NOW SINCE 9/11.
THAT IS GOING OUT, FINDING
PEOPLE, HIGH-VALUE TARGETS AND
KILLING THEM.
SO IT'S HARD TO IMAGINE
INITIALLY, OKAY, WHAT DO I DO?
ONE OF HIS FRIENDS SAID I KNOW
HOW TO HUNT AND TRACK AND I KNOW
HOW TO KILL.
BUT THE FACT IS THEY DO HAVE
WHAT WE CALL EXECUTIVE SKILLS,
FUNCTIONING SKILLS.
IT'S JUST A QUESTION OF HOW YOU
TRANSLATE IT.
AND THE MILITARY DOESN'T REALLY
WANT THEM TO LEAVE BECAUSE THIS
IS THE GROUP OF PEOPLE, SPECIAL
OPERATORS, THAT'S GOING TO BE
INCREASINGLY FIGHTING OUR WARS
IN OUR ASYMMETRICAL BATTLEFIELD.
SO THEY HAVE, YOU KNOW, THEY
HAVE SOME PROGRAMS PERHAPS,
INCENTIVE FOR PEOPLE WHO WANT TO
GET OUT OF OTHER SERVICES BUT IN
THIS ELITE FORCE UNIT, THEY JUST
DON'T... THEM DON'T WANT THEM TO
LEAVE.
THEY WANT TO SAVE THE SLOTS.
THEY WANT TO KEEP THE MONEY FOR
THE NEXT ROUND OF SPECIAL
OPERATORS WHO ARE COMING IN.
I MEAN THERE WERE PROGRAMS, SOME
PROGRAMS AVAILABLE TO THIS
FELLOW AND HE DIDN'T EVEN KNOW
ABOUT THEM.
HE HAD MET FOR A YEAR.
HE HAD BEEN PLANNING TO GET OUT.
HE MET WITH PEOPLE FROM THE V.A.
AND ELSEWHERE.
AND THEY JUST DIDN'T KNOW.
WE'VE SINCE FOUND OUT AND I'VE
TALKED TO PEOPLE AT THE V.A. WHO
SAY THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE IS
VERY BAD AT COMMUNICATING WITH
SOLDIERS WHILE THEY'RE STILL IN
THE MILITARY THAT THIS IS
AVAILABLE, THIS IS AVAILABLE,
THIS IS AVAILABLE.
>> Suarez: THE ARTICLE IS CALLED
"THE SHOOTER."
YOU CAN READ IT ONLINE.
PHIL BRONSTEIN WROTE IT.
HE'S FROM THE CENTER FOR
INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING.
THANKS A LOT.
>> THANK YOU, RAY, FOR HAVING
ME.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, THE VERY HIGH
COST OF A VERY COMMON PRODUCT.
A GROWING DEMAND FOR PALM OIL--
USED IN COOKING AND MANY
PROCESSED FOODS-- IS DRIVING ONE
COUNTRY TO HARVEST IT USING
MIGRANT WORKERS, MANY OF THEM
CHILDREN.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT STEVE
SAPIENZA TVELERAD TO MALAYSIA,
THE WORLD'S SECOND LARGEST
EXPORTER OF THE OIL.
HIS STORY IS PART OF A
COLLABORATION WITH THE PULITZER
CENTER ON CRISIS REPORTING.
IN MALAYSIA'S SABAH PROVINCE,
MIGRANT WORKERS HUSTLE TO KEEP
UP WITH THE RISING GLOBAL DEMAND
FOR PALM OIL.
MADE FROM THE FRUIT OF OIL PALM
TREE, IT IS NOW FOUND IN MORE
THAN HALF OF ALL THE PRODUCTS
SOLD IN U.S. SUPERMARKETS, FROM
COOKIES TO COSMETICS.
THIS LABOR-INTENSIVE WORK HAS
CHANGED LITTLE SINCE THE 1960s,
WHEN THE GOVERNMENT FIRST PUSHED
THE EXPANSION OF PALM OIL
PRODUCTION.
TODAY PALM OIL IS MALAYSIA'S TOP
CROP, NETTING $25 BILLION A
YEAR, AND DRIVING THE SPREAD OF
PALM OIL PLANTATIONS INTO THE
WILDERNESS.
THE ONCE SLEEPY PORT TOWN OF
LAHAD DATU IS AT THE EPICENTER
OF MALSIA'AYS PALM OIL BOOM.
THE LOCAL POPULATION HAS DOUBLED
OVER THE PAST 15 YEARS, AND REAL
ESTATE PRICES ARE SOARING IN
WHAT HAS BEEN DUBBED PALM CITY.
>> THIS IS THE CATALYST FOR ALL
KINDS OF BUSINESS ACTIVITIES.
>> Reporter: NASRUN DATUK MANSUR
IS A STATE ASSEMBLYMAN AND AIDE
TO SABAH'S CHIEF MINISTER.
HIS GOVERNMENT IS EXPANDING THE
PORT IN LAHAD DATU TO INCLUDE
PALM OIL REFINERIES, AS WELL AS
FERTILIZER AND BIOFUEL PLANTS.
>> OIL PALM IS THE BASIS OF OUR
ECONOMY.
IT IS READILY AVAILABLE, AND OF
COURSE IT IS CHEAP-- CHEAP TO
PRODUCE OIL PALM, ACTUALLY,
COMPARED TO OTHER OILS.
>> Reporter: ONE BIG REASON THE
OIL IS SO CHEAP TO PRODUCE IS
THE STEADY SUPPLY OF MIGRANT
LABOR.
THE PALM OIL SECTOR RELIES ON
SOME 500,000 FOREIGN WORKERS TO
FEED GLOBAL DEMAND FOR THE
PRODUCT AND FUEL MALAYSIA'S
ECONOMIC PROSPERITY.
FOR DECADES, INDONESIAN AND
FILIPINO WORKERS HAVE MIGRATED
TO SABAH TO HARVEST THE PALM OIL
FRUIT.
LEANORY MARCOS ARRIVED WITH HIS
PARENTS FROM INDONESIA WHEN HE
WAS 12 YEARS OLD.
WITHOUT DOCUMENTS TO PROVE HIS
RESIDENCY, HE COULD NOT ENROLL
IN SCHOOL.
SO FOR THE PAST FIVE YEARS, HE
HAS TOILED ON THE PLANTATIONS,
EARNING ABOUT $7 A DAY.
FATMA TABBO WAS STUDYINING
INDONESIA UNTIL LAST YEAR, BUT
SHE STOPPED WHEN HER FAMILY RAN
OUT OF MONEY.
>> I'M WORKING HERE, CUTTING AND
CLEARING PALM BRANCHES.
BUT NOW I DON'T HAVE MONEY.
>> Reporter: HOW CAN YOU ENTER
SCHOOL IF HAVE NO MONEY?
LEANORY AND FATMA'S STORIES ARE
SIMILAR TO THAT OF AN ESTIMATED
50,000 MIGRANT CHILDREN WITHOUT
ACCESS TO EDUCATION IN SABAH.
>> THEY HAVE NO PAPERS.
THEY CANNOT WORK LEGALLY.
SO IN A WAY, THEY ARE INVISIBLE.
>> Reporter: AS DIRECTOR OF A
SOCIAL WELFARE CHARITY IN SABAH,
ALISON NERI HAS SEEN WHAT
HAPPENS TO MIGRANT CHILDREN WHO
DONT GO TO SCHOOL.
>> THERE'S NOWHERE ELSE FOR THEM
TO GO, SO THE ONLY THING FOR
THEM IS TO HELP THEIR PARENTS,
TO SUPPLEMENT THENCOM IE OF THE
FAMILY.
>> Reporter: MORE OF THE WORLD'S
WORKING CHILDREN ARE EMPLOYED IN
AGRICULTURE THAN IN ANY OTHER
SECTOR, ACCORDING TO THE
INTERNATIONAL LABOR
ORGANIZATION.
IN SABAH, SURVEYS SHOW MORE THAN
50% OF CHILDREN WITHOUT
SCHOOLING END UP WORKING AS
CHILD LABORERS.
FATMA'S FATHER, MAPPI TABBO, AND
HIS FAMILY OF FIVE CHILDREN,
AGES FIVE TO 18, LIVE AND WORK
ON A SECLUDED 60-ACRE PLANTATION
ABOUT ONE HOUR BY CAR FROM LAHAD
DATU.
SINCE ARRIVING, THE FAMILY HAS
FACED A COMMON PROBLEM: WHERE TO
ENROLL THEIR KIDS IN SCHOOL.
TEN YEARS AFTER MOVING FMRO
INDONESIA FOR A BETTER-PAYING
JOB, THE 41-YEAR-OLD STILL RISKS
ARREST AND POSSIBLE DEPORTATION
IF CAUGHT BY POLICE.
FOR HIM, SENDING THE KIDS TO THE
MALAYSIAN SCHOOL IN TOWN IS NOT
AN OPTION.
>> A LOT OF MIGRANTS COME IN
WITH THE CHILDREN, OR THEY HAVE
NEWBORN CHILDREN THERE.
THEY HAVE NO DOCUMENTS.
THEY HAVE NO ACCESS TO
EDUCATION-- NO ACCESS EVEN TO
THE OUTSIDE WORLD.
>> Reporter: AEGILE FERNANDEZ
GREW UP IN A MIGRANT FAMILY ON
A MALAYSIAN TEA PLANTATION.
SHE IS NOW PROGRAM DIRECTOR OF
TENAGANITA, A MALAYSIA-BASED
NON-PROFIT GROUP THAT ASSISTS
MIGRANT WORKERS.
>> IF YOU LOOK BACK EVEN FROM
OUR INDEPENDENCE, EVEN RIGHT
AFTER OUR INDEPENDENCE,
EDUCATION WAS FOR ALL.
THERE WAS NO QUESTION OF WHETHER
YOU HAD A DOCUMENT.
SO EVERYONE COULD ENTER INTO ANY
SCHOOL THAT WAS NEAREST TO YOU.
>> Reporter: ACCORDING TO THE
LATEST CENSUS, MIGRANTS, MOSTLY
FROM INDONESIA, NOW COMPRISE
NEARLY ONE THIRD OF THE 3.2
MILLION POPULATION IN SABAH
PROVINCE, AND THAT, SAYS
FERNANDEZ, HAS MADE THE
GOVERNMENT LESS WILLING TO PAY
FOR UNIVERSAL EDUCATION.
>> THIS WHOLE QUESTION THAT
AROSE FROM LOCALS THAT IF YOU
PROVIDE THE EDUCATION FOR
MIGRANT CHILDREN, THEN THE LOCAL
CHILDREN LOSE OUT.
>> Reporter: AT A PLANTATION
OWNED BY PPB OIL PALMS, A
SPECIAL SCHOOL RUN BY A LOCAL
NONPROFIT CALLED HUMANA HAS BEEN
TRYING TO ADDRESS THE MIGRANTS'
EDUCATION NEEDS.
HUMANA WAS FOUNDED OVER TWO
DECADES AGO BY DANISH-NATIVE
TORBEN BENING.
>> WE SAW CHILDREN GOING AROUND
IN THE PLANTATIONS WITHOUT ANY
EDUCATION.
SO IN 1990, THE FIRST THREE
SCHOOL PROJECTS WERE STARTED
WITH 70 CHILDREN.
DUE TO THE DEMAND FOR EDUCATION,
IT HAS GROWN TO 128 LEARNING
CENTERS WITH MORE THAN 12,000
CHILDREN.
THROUGH OUR PROJECTS, I BELIEVE
THEY HAVE HAD A BIG EFFECT IN
ACTUALLY GETTING AN AWARENESS
THAT THE CHILDREN EXISTED, AND
ALSO THAT THEY SHOULD GO TO
SCHOOL.
>> Reporter: THE PALM OIL
COMPANY PAID FOR THE
CONSTRUCTION OF THIS
SCHOOLHOUSE, THE BOOKS, AND THE
UNIFORMS.
HUMANA PROVIDES THE TEACHERS AND
STUDY PLANS.
PPB GROUP MANAGER FREDERICK CHOK
SAYS THE SCHOOLS HELP THE
COMPANY ATTRACT AND RETAIN
SKILLED LABOR.
>> THE REASON WHY THEY ARE HERE
IS BECAUSE A LOT OF THEM, THEY
WANT TO PUT THEIR CHILDREN IN
THE HUMANA SCHOOL.
>> Reporter: TODAY AN ESTIMATED
12,000 MIGRANT YOUTH HAVE ACCESS
TO THE BASIC EDUCATION OFFERED
AT THE NONPROFIT LEARNING
CENTERS.
BUT FOR TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
KIDS WHO WORK ON OTHER
PLANTATIONS, SCHOOL REMAINS OUT
OF REACH AND OFFICIALS SHOW NO
INDICATION THAT REALITY WILL
CHANGE.
>> THE GOVERNMENT SEEMS TO AGREE
THAT THE CHILDREN OF THESE
WORKERS NEED EDUCATION TOO, BUT
THEY ARE NOT QUALIFIED TO ENTER
THE LOCAL SCHOOLS BECAUSE THEY
DON'T HAVE THE PROPER PAPERS.
>> Reporter: MEANWHILE, FATMA
TABBO STILL HOLDS ON TO HOPE
THAT SHE CAN RETURN TO SCHOOL--
AND DREAMS THAT HER SIBLINGS
WILL GET AN EDUCATION.
>> I WANT MY BROTHER AND SISTER
TO GO TO SCHOOL, SO THEY WILL BE
ABLE TO READ AND COUNT.
>> Reporter: BUT FOR NOW, THE
TABBO KIDS-- AND THOUSANDS OF
OTHER MIGRANT CHILDREN-- WILL
CONTINUE TO TOIL IN THE SHADOWS
OF THE PALM OIL TREES.
>> Brown: STEVE SAPIENZA HAS
REPORTED OTHER STORIES ABOUT THE
SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL COSTS
OF PRODUCING GOODS MANY OF US
TAKE FOR GRANTED.
YOU'LL FIND A LINK ON OUR WEB
SITE TO THE PULITZER CENTER'S
PAGE ON "GLOBAL GOODS, LOCAL
COSTS."
>> Woodruff: AND WE COME BACK TO
THE STATE OF THE UNION ADDRESS,
AND TO THE ANALYSIS OF SHIELDS
AND BROOKS, SYNDICATED COLUMNIST
MARK SHIELDS AND "NEW YORK
TIMES" COLUMNIST DAVID BROOKS.
WELCOME,ENDALMEN.
SO, DAVID, WHAT ARE YOU LOOKING
FOR FROM THE PRESIDENT TONIGHT?
>> TWO THINGS.
FIRST POLITICALLY HOW
AGGRESSIONIVE IS IT?
THE INAUGURAL ADDRESS WAS PRETTY
AGGRESSIONIVE DEFENSE OF
GOVERNMENT AND HIS PHILOSOPHY.
IT WAS MUCH MORE AGGRESSIONIVE
THAN ANYTHING HE'S DONE HIS
FIRST TIME.
THE THING IS ECONOMICS.
WHAT IS THE GROWTH AGENDA?
THERE ARE TWO BIG PROBLEMS THAT
I THINK HE CAN ADDRESS.
ONE IS THE WAY POLITICAL
DYSFUNCTION IS DRAGGING DOWN
GROWTH LEADING TO POLICY
UNCERTAINTY.
NOBODY KNOWS HOW TO INVEST.
NOBODY WANTS TO GROW.
THE SECOND THING IS, WHAT
EXACTLY IS A GROWTH AGENDA?
NEITHER PARTY HAS A VERY
PERSUASIVE ONE.
SAY YOU'RE A 55-YEAR-OLD GUY IN
ERIE, PENNSYLVANIA.
YOUR JOB HAS BEEN DISPLACED BY
TECHNOLOGY.
WHAT'S ON OFFER FOR YOU?
OVER THE LAST THREE YEARS WE'VE
SEEN THIS DRAMATIC DROP IN MALE
WORK FORCE PARTICIPATION, A LOT
OF PEOPLE GOING ON SOCIAL
SECURITY DISABILITY ROLES.
WHAT CAN OBAMA OFFER YOU TO GET
YOU BACK IN THE LABOR FORCE.
>> Woodruff: WE KNOW HE'S GOING
TO TALK ABOUT INFRASTRUCTURE,
ABOUT EDUCATION.
WHAT DO YOU LOOK FOR?
I MEAN, DOES IT MATTER OWH MUCH
HESPELLS OUT THE EXACT NATURE
OF WHAT GROWTH...
>> I THINK WHAT DAVID SAID IS
IMPORTANT.
BUT WHEN THERE ARE EIGHT
PRIORITIES THERE'S NO REAL
PRIORITY.
ALL OF THESE ARE IMPORTANT.
BUT WHAT I WANT TO KNOW HE COMES
AWAY WITH A SENSE OF URGENCY
TONIGHT.
OBVIOUSLY TO THE AMERICAN VOTERS
IT'S THE ECONOMY AND JOBS.
WE'RE LOOKING, JUDY, AT MEDIAN
HOUSEHOLD INCOME HAS DROPPED
$3469 OVER THE LAST DECADE IN
THIS COUNTRY.
AND MEDIAN INCOME IS DOWN.
WE'VE GOT A NEW NORMAL OF ALMOST
8% UNEMPLOYMENT.
THERE REALLY IS A SENSE OF, ARE
THERE ANY WEAPONS LEFT IN THE
ORDINANCE TO ATTACK THIS?
I THINK ONE THING WE CAN BE
ABSOLUTELY SURE OF IS THE
PRESIDENT WILL TALK LONG.
I WENT THROUGH AND THE DEMOCRATS
HAVE AVERAGED ONE HOUR AND 14
MINUTES, BILL CLINTON.
AN HOUR AND FIVE MINUTES, BARACK
OBAMA.
RONALD REAGAN AVERAGED 40 MIN
TONIGHT'S HIS STATE OF THE UNION
AND RICHARD NIXON AVERAGED 35
MINUTES.
>> Woodruff: THAT COUNTS
APPLAUSE.
>> THAT COUNTS APPLAUSE.
I THINK HE WOULD ENDEAR HIMSELF
TO THE NATION IF HE JUST STOOD
UP AND SAID I'M GOING TO...
>> THAT SHOULD BE A VOTING ISSUE
ALL BY ITSELF.
WHO DO YOU VOTE FOR?
>> Woodruff: ARE YOU SAYING
THERE'S BEEN A LACK OF URGENCY
COMING OUT OF THE WHITE HOUSE?
>> I THINK THERE'S A LOT OF
IMPORTANT ISSUES THAT THEY'VE
EMPHASIZED.
GUN CONTROL OR IMMIGRATION OR
TRAINING AND RESEARCH.
BUT I MEAN WHAT IS IT THAT COMES
OUT THAT THE PRESIDENT SAYS THIS
IS WHAT DEFINES MY PRESIDENCY?
DAVID IS RIGHT.
HE WAS FAR MORE ASSERTIVE, IN
HIS INAUGURAL ADDRESS THAN HE
WAS IN HIS FIRST TERM.
I GUESS WE EXPECT THAT TO
CONTINUE.
IS THERE AN OLIVE BRANCH
OFFERED?
I MEAN, IS THERE A SENSE OR IS
THERE GOING TO BE THE
REPUBLICANS HAVE LOST FIVE OF
THE LAST SIX ELECTIONS IN THE
POPULAR VOTE.
FIVE OF THE LAST ELECTIONS THEY
LOST SENATE SEATS.
THEY LOST THE HOUSE RACES BY 1.3
MILLION EVEN THOUGH THEY ONLY
LOST EIGHT SEATS.
THEY'RE A PARTY... AND THE
REPUBLICANS FEEL THEY GET ROLLED
ON THE FISCAL CLIFF.
SO DOES THE PRESIDENT TRY AND
PICK THEM UP AND MAKE THEM A
PARTNER IN ANYWAY?
OR DOES HE TRY TO STEAM ROLE
THEM?
TO ME THAT'S WHAT I'M LOOKING
FOR SNIT.
>> THAT'S WHAT I MEANT BY HIM
BEING AGGRESSIONIVE.
MARK TALKED ABOUT THE FLAT
INCOMES, THE PEOPLE OUT OF THE
LABOR FORCE.
WE'RE IN THIS NEW BUDGET
REALITY.
WE'RE PROBABLY NOT GOING TO GET
A BUDGET DEAL TO REDUCE DEFICITS
BUT OBAMA CAN'T DO ANYTHING TO
INCREASE DEFICITS.
I THINK WE KNOW HE'S GOING SAY
WE'RE NOT GOING TO INCREASE
DEFICITS.
THIS WON'T COST THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE A DIME.
HOW DO YOU DO BIG PROGRAMS
WITHOUT COSTING ANYTHING?
DOING THAT EITHER SUGGESTS
YOU'RE GOING TO MAKE SERIOUS
TRADE-OFFS CUT SOMEWHERE ELSE TO
SPEND HERE OR DO SMALL SYMBOLIC
STUFF.
>> Woodruff: THE WHITE HOUSE IS
ALREADY PUTTING OUT SOME
ADVANCED TEXT SAYING THAT THESE
ARE THINGS... SOME OF THE THINGS
HE WANTS TO DO ARE NOT GOING TO
COST THE TAXPAYERS ANYTHING.
BOTH OF YOU HAVE MENTIONED THE
INAUGURAL ADDRESS.
WE HEAR FROM THE WHITE HOUSE
THAT THE PRESIDENT IS NOT JUST
TALKING TO THE MEMBERS OF
CONGRESS IN THE CHAMBER.
HE'S TALKING TO MILLISON OF
AMERICANS WHO HAVE EVERYTHING AT
STAKE.
>> YOU COULD SAY TO SOME DEGREE
THE AUDIENCE IS THE 48% WHO DID
NOT VOTE FOR HIM.
IN THE SENSE THAT WHAT HE SAYS
TO THEM.
BUT REALLY THE TRUE SENSE
TONIGHT IS THE PEOPLE WHO ARE
LISTENING ARE THOSE WHO SUPPORT,
ADMIRE AND IDENTIFY WITH THE
PRESIDENT.
THAT'S THE CASE WITH EVERY STATE
OF THE UNION.
BUT HE'LL BE TALKING TO THE...
IN THAT ROOM AS WELL.
I MEAN, TO THE PARTICULARLY TO
THE HOUSE.
I THINK THAT'S WHERE THERE'S
GOING TO BE A GRAVEYARD OR A
LAUNCHING PAD FOR A SECOND TERM.
THAT'S WHERE IT WILL TAKE PLACE.
>> I'D SAY IT'S HIS OWN
ADMINISTRATION.
THE STATE OF THE UNION ADDRESS
RARELY MOVE POLLS.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE LAST SAY 10
OR 15.
YOU GET A TWO-POINT BUMP UP OR
DOWN.
NOTHING SIGNIFICANTLY.
WHAT YOU'RE DEFINING FOR YOUR
ADMINISTRATION IS YOUR SET OF
PRIORITIES.
WHAT DO YOU MENTION A LOT?
WHAT DO YOU BELIEVE OUT?
WHAT DO YOU GIVE A PASSING
REFERENCE TO?
IT'S MORE OF THE AGENDA YOU'RE
TELLING EVERYBODY ON YOUR OWN
TEAM THIS IS WHAT WE REALLY CARE
ABOUT.
THIS IS HOW YOU ADJUDICATE THOSE
DISPUTES, WHAT WE REALLY CARE
ABOUT MOST NOWED HOW MUCH DOES
IT MATTER WHAT THE PRESIDENT
SAYS AND HOW HE SAYS IT?
>> WHEN THE STATE OF THE UNION
IS TELLING.
THE PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH
STATE OF THE UNION IN 2002 DID
MATTER.
BECAUSE IT WAS... THAT WAS
REALLY THE CUSP OF GOING TO WAR
IN IRAN AFTER THE ATTACK OF
9/11.
BILL CLINTON'S 1996 ADDRESS WHEN
HE SAID PREMATURELY AND
ERRONEOUS THE ERA OF BIG
GOVERNMENT IS OVER.
BUT IT INDICATED HIS WHOLE
STRATEGY FOR HIS RE-ELECTION
CAMPAIGN WHICH QUITE FRANKLY
WORKED.
IT'S VERY FEW, JUDY, THAT YOU
CAN LOOK BACK AND SAY, BOY, THAT
WAS THE DEFINING MOMENT
GALVANIZING INSTANCE.
>> AGENDAS MATTER.
THE PROBLEM THE PRESIDENT HAS
HAD FOR THE LAST TWO YEARS HOW
DO YOU PASS ANYTHING WHEN YOU
DON'T CONTROL THE HOUSE?
WHAT AGENDA DOES HE THINK CAN
GET THROUGH THE HOUSE?
SETTING THE ACTUAL AGENDA IS
WHAT MATTERS.
THE SPEECH A LITTLE LESS SO.
>> Woodruff: WELL, WE WILL BE
WATCHING THAT SPEECH.
PAYING ATTENTION TO EVERY
SYLLABLE.
OUT OF THE PRESIDENT'S MOUTH.
WE'LL BE COMING UP IN A FEW
HOURS WITH BOTH OF YOU.
MARK SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS,
THANK YOU.
>> Brown: FINALLY TONIGHT, A
BEHIND-THE SCENES LOOK AT THE
POLITICAL SHOWDOWN OVER SPENDING
CUTS AND TAX INCREASES.
TONIGHT'S "FRONTLINE" BREAKS
DOWN THE STANDOFF IN 2011 THAT
LED TO THE FISCAL CLIFF AND
TRIGGERED THE CURRENT BATTLE
OVER AUTOMATIC SPENDING CUTS SET
TO KICK IN NEXT MONTH.
HERE'S AN EXCERPT FROM
"CLIFFHANGER," ABOUT THE
NEGOTIATIONS TO GET A SO-CALLED
"GRAND BARGAIN" BETWEEN THE
PRESIDENT AND TWO LEADING
REPUBLICANS, SPEAKER JOHN
BOEHNER AND HOUSE MAJORITY
LEADER ERIC CANTOR.
>> BOEHNER WANTED TO RETURN TO
THE GRAND BARGAIN HE AND OBAMA
HAD NEGOTIATED BEFORE THE
ELECTION.
>> I AGREED TO PUT $800 BILLION
OF REVENUE ON THE TABLE IF THE
PRESIDENT WAS WILLING TO MAKE
REAL SPENDING CUTS AND REFORM
OUR ENTITLEMENT PROGRAMS SO
THEY'RE SUSTAINABLE FOR THE LONG
TERM.
>> BOEHNER'S AT THE WHITE HOUSE.
HE SAYS I'M GIVING YOU $800
BILLION IN TAX REVENUE.
WHAT DO I GET FOR IT?
THE PRESIDENT SAYS NOTHING.
AND WHAT THE PRESIDENT MEANT WAS
YOU ALREADY HAD PUT THAT ON THE
TABLE BEFORE.
I WON THE ELECTION.
THAT'S NOT A CONCESSION.
YOU NEED TO COME FURTHER TO ME
THAN THAT.
THAT'S THE STARTING POINT.
THAT'S THE ANTE.
>> Reporter: THE PRESIDENT
WANTED MUCH MORE FROM BOEHNER
THIS TIME AROUND.
>> THERE WERE SPENDING CUTS THAT
WE HAD AGREED TO IN AUGUST FOR
JULY... OR JULY OF 2011 THAT
WERE TAKEN OFF THE TABLE.
WEREN'T EVEN ALLOWED TO BE
DISCUSSED.
IN DECEMBER OF 2012.
IT WAS EX-PASS RATING.
>> IT TURNS OUT THE WHITE HOUSE
ISN'T WHERE THEY WERE IN 2011.
THEY WALKED BACK FROM
SIGNIFICANT CONCESSIONS THAT
THEY WERE WILLING TO MAKE THEN.
THE ATTITUDE IS I WON THE
ELECTION.
I DON'T HAVE TO GO BACK TO THE
NEGOTIATING POSITION.
THAT WAS ON THE TABLE THEN.
THIS IS WHAT'S ON THE TABLE NOW.
>> I HAD HEARD OVER THE COURSE
OF AT THAT POINT SIX WEEKS ON A
NUMBER OF OCCASIONS, YOU HAVE TO
REMEMBER I WON.
WELL, REPUBLICANS MAINTAINED
THEIR MAJORITY IN THE U.S.
HOUSE.
YOU KNOW, WE WON TOO.
>> Brown: THAT WAS AN EXCERPT
FROM CLIFF HANGER
FROM "CLIFF-HANGER," AIRING ON
>> Brown: THAT WAS AN EXCERPT
FRONTLINE TONIGHT, ON MOST PBS
FROM "CLIFF-HANGER," AIRING ON
STATIONS.
FRONTLINE TONIGHT, ON MOST PBS
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
STATIONS.
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
NORTH KOREA
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
CONDUCTED ITS THIRD HIGH-LEVEL
NORTH KOREA
NUCLEAR TEST AN ACTION CONDEMNED
CONDUCTED ITS THIRD HIGH-LEVEL
BY THE UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
NUCLEAR TEST AN ACTION CONDEMNED
COUNCIL, PRESIDENT OBAMA AND
BY THE UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
OTHER WORLD LEADERS.
COUNCIL, PRESIDENT OBAMA AND
A FORMER LOS ANGELES POLICEMAN
OTHER WORLD LEADERS.
WANTED FOR THREE MURDERS
A FORMER LOS ANGELES POLICEMAN
BARRICADED HIMSELF IN A MOUNTAIN
WANTED FOR THREE MURDERS
CABIN AFTER A RUNNING GUN FIGHT
BARRICADED HIMSELF IN A MOUNTAIN
WITH POLICE.
CABIN AFTER A RUNNING GUN FIGHT
THE LOS ANGELES TIMES REPORTED
WITH POLICE.
THAT ONE OFFICER WAS KILLED AND
THE LOS ANGELES TIMES REPORTED
ANOTHER WOUNDED.
THAT ONE OFFICER WAS KILLED AND
AND PRESIDENT MADE READY FOR
ANOTHER WOUNDED.
TONIGHT'S STATE OF THE UNION
AND PRESIDENT MADE READY FOR
ADDRESS.
TONIGHT'S STATE OF THE UNION
HE PLANNED TO FOCUS ON JOB
ADDRESS.
CREATION AND TO PRESS CONGRESS
HE PLANNED TO FOCUS ON JOB
TO AVOID ACROSS-THE-BOARD BUDGET
CREATION AND TO PRESS CONGRESS
CUTS.
TO AVOID ACROSS-THE-BOARD BUDGET
ONLINE WE EXAMINE GOOD AND BAD
CUTS.
NETWORKING.
ONLINE WE EXAMINE GOOD AND BAD
HARI SREENIVASAN EXPLAINS.
NETWORKING.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DO YOU FIND
HARI SREENIVASAN EXPLAINS.
A JOB IF YOU'RE TURNED OFF BY
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DO YOU FIND
THE PROSPECT OF ASKING OTHERS
A JOB IF YOU'RE TURNED OFF BY
FOR HELP?
THE PROSPECT OF ASKING OTHERS
ON MAKING SENSE, HEADHUNTER NICK
FOR HELP?
CORCODILOS OFFERS STRATEGIES AND
ON MAKING SENSE, HEADHUNTER NICK
SOME KEY ADVICE: KEEP UP YOUR
CORCODILOS OFFERS STRATEGIES AND
FRIENDSHIPS.
SOME KEY ADVICE: KEEP UP YOUR
WHO WON'T BE AT THE CAPITOL
FRIENDSHIPS.
TONIGHT?
WHO WON'T BE AT THE CAPITOL
THE DESIGNATED SURVIVOR.
TONIGHT?
THAT IS THEABIN CET SECRETARY
THE DESIGNATED SURVIVOR.
PICKED TO STAY HOME TO ENSURE
THAT IS THEABIN CET SECRETARY
PRESIDENTIAL SUCCESSION IN CASE
PICKED TO STAY HOME TO ENSURE
OF DISASTER.
PRESIDENTIAL SUCCESSION IN CASE
WE LOOK BACK AT THIS TRADITION
OF DISASTER.
ON THE RUNDOWN.
WE LOOK BACK AT THIS TRADITION
AND FORMER WHITE HOUSE SPEECH
ON THE RUNDOWN.
WRITERS OFFER INSIDER TAKES ON
AND FORMER WHITE HOUSE SPEECH
CRAFTING THE STATE OF THE UNION
WRITERS OFFER INSIDER TAKES ON
ADDRESS.
CRAFTING THE STATE OF THE UNION
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
ADDRESS.
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
JEFF?
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
>> Brown: AND THAT'S THE
JEFF?
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
>> Brown: AND THAT'S THE
I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
>> Woodurff: AND I'M JUDY
I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
WOODRUFF.
>> Woodurff: AND I'M JUDY
WE'LL BE BACK TONIGHT AT 9:00
WOODRUFF.
P.M. EASTERN TIME WITH FULL
WE'LL BE BACK TONIGHT AT 9:00
COVERAGE OF PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
P.M. EASTERN TIME WITH FULL
STATE OF THE UNION ADDRESS, BOTH
COVERAGE OF PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
ON AIR AND ONLINE.
STATE OF THE UNION ADDRESS, BOTH
IMMEDIATELY AFTERWARD, WE'LL
ON AIR AND ONLINE.
CARRY THE REPUBLICAN RESPONSE BY
IMMEDIATELY AFTERWARD, WE'LL
FLORIDA SENATOR MARCO RUBIO.
CARRY THE REPUBLICAN RESPONSE BY
AND MARK AND DAVID WILL BE BACK
FLORIDA SENATOR MARCO RUBIO.
WITH MORE ANALYSIS.
AND MARK AND DAVID WILL BE BACK
UNTIL THEN, WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE
WITH MORE ANALYSIS.
AND AGAIN HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
UNTIL THEN, WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE
THANK YOU, AND GOOD NIGHT.